OF THE THINGS WHICH ARE IN OUR POWER AND NOT IN OUR POWER.—Of all the
faculties (except that which I shall soon mention), you will find not
one which is capable of contemplating itself, and, consequently, not
capable either of approving or disapproving. How far does the grammatic
art possess the contemplating power? As far as forming a judgment about
what is written and spoken. And how far music? As far as judging about
melody. Does either of them then contemplate itself? By no means. But
when you must write something to your friend, grammar will tell you
what words you should write; but whether you should write or not,
grammar will not tell you. And so it is with music as to musical
sounds; but whether you should sing at the present time and play on the
lute, or do neither, music will not tell you. What faculty then will
tell you? That which contemplates both itself and all other things. And
what is this faculty? The rational faculty; for this is the only
faculty that we have received which examines itself, what it is, and
what power it has, and what is the value of this gift, and examines all
other faculties: for what else is there which tells us that golden
things are beautiful, for they do not say so themselves? Evidently it
is the faculty which is capable of judging of appearances. What else
judges of music, grammar, and the other faculties, proves their uses,
and points out the occasions for using them? Nothing else.

What then should a man have in readiness in such circumstances? What
else than this? What is mine, and what is not mine; and what is
permitted to me, and what is not permitted to me. I must die. Must I
then die lamenting? I must be put in chains. Must I then also lament? I
must go into exile. Does any man then hinder me from going with smiles
and cheerfulness and contentment? Tell me the secret which you possess.
I will not, for this is in my power. But I will put you in chains. Man,
what are you talking about? Me, in chains? You may fetter my leg, but
my will not even Zeus himself can overpower. I will throw you into
prison. My poor body, you mean. I will cut your head off. When then
have I told you that my head alone cannot be cut off? These are the
things which philosophers should meditate on, which they should write
daily, in which they should exercise themselves.

What then did Agrippinus say? He said, "I am not a hindrance to
myself." When it was reported to him that his trial was going on in the
Senate, he said: "I hope it may turn out well; but it is the fifth hour
of the day"—this was the time when he was used to exercise himself and
then take the cold bath,—"let us go and take our exercise." After he
had taken his exercise, one comes and tells him, "You have been
condemned." "To banishment," he replies, "or to death?" "To
banishment." "What about my property?" "It is not taken from you." "Let
us go to Aricia then," he said, "and dine."


HOW A MAN ON EVERY OCCASION CAN MAINTAIN HIS PROPER CHARACTER.—To the
rational animal only is the irrational intolerable; but that which is
rational is tolerable. Blows are not naturally intolerable. How is
that? See how the Lacedaemonians endure whipping when they have learned
that whipping is consistent with reason. To hang yourself is not
intolerable. When then you have the opinion that it is rational, you go
and hang yourself. In short, if we observe, we shall find that the
animal man is pained by nothing so much as by that which is irrational;
and, on the contrary, attracted to nothing so much as to that which is
rational.

Only consider at what price you sell your own will: if for no other
reason, at least for this, that you sell it not for a small sum. But
that which is great and superior perhaps belongs to Socrates and such
as are like him. Why then, if we are naturally such, are not a very
great number of us like him? Is it true then that all horses become
swift, that all dogs are skilled in tracking footprints? What then,
since I am naturally dull, shall I, for this reason, take no pains? I
hope not. Epictetus is not superior to Socrates; but if he is not
inferior, this is enough for me; for I shall never be a Milo, and yet I
do not neglect my body; nor shall I be a Croesus, and yet I do not
neglect my property; nor, in a word, do we neglect looking after
anything because we despair of reaching the highest degree.


HOW A MAN SHOULD PROCEED FROM THE PRINCIPLE OF GOD BEING THE FATHER OF
ALL MEN TO THE REST.—If a man should be able to assent to this doctrine
as he ought, that we are all sprung from God in an especial manner, and
that God is the father both of men and of gods, I suppose that he would
never have any ignoble or mean thoughts about himself. But if Cæsar
(the emperor) should adopt you, no one could endure your arrogance; and
if you know that you are the son of Zeus, will you not be elated? Yet
we do not so; but since these two things are mingled in the generation
of man, body in common with the animals, and reason and intelligence in
common with the gods, many incline to this kinship, which is miserable
and mortal; and some few to that which is divine and happy. Since then
it is of necessity that every man uses everything according to the
opinion which he has about it, those, the few, who think that they are
formed for fidelity and modesty and a sure use of appearances have no
mean or ignoble thoughts about themselves; but with the many it is
quite the contrary. For they say, What am I? A poor, miserable man,
with my wretched bit of flesh. Wretched, indeed; but you possess
something better than your bit of flesh. Why then do you neglect that
which is better, and why do you attach yourself to this?

Through this kinship with the flesh, some of us inclining to it become
like wolves, faithless and treacherous and mischievous; some become
like lions, savage and bestial and untamed; but the greater part of us
become foxes, and other worse animals. For what else is a slanderer and
malignant man than a fox, or some other more wretched and meaner
animal? See then and take care that you do not become some one of these
miserable things.


OF PROGRESS OR IMPROVEMENT.—He who is making progress, having learned
from philosophers that desire means the desire of good things, and
aversion means aversion from bad things; having learned too that
happiness and tranquillity are not attainable by man otherwise than by
not failing to obtain what he desires, and not falling into that which
he would avoid; such a man takes from himself desire altogether and
confers it, but he employs his aversion only on things which are
dependent on his will. For if he attempts to avoid anything independent
of his will, he knows that sometimes he will fall in with something
which he wishes to avoid, and he will be unhappy. Now if virtue
promises good fortune and tranquillity and happiness, certainly also
the progress towards virtue is progress towards each of these things.
For it is always true that to whatever point the perfecting of anything
leads us, progress is an approach towards this point.

How then do we admit that virtue is such as I have said, and yet seek
progress in other things and make a display of it? What is the product
of virtue? Tranquillity. Who then makes improvement? Is it he who has
read many books of Chrysippus? But does virtue consist in having
understood Chrysippus? If this is so, progress is clearly nothing else
than knowing a great deal of Chrysippus. But now we admit that virtue
produces one thing, and we declare that approaching near to it is
another thing, namely, progress or improvement. Such a person, says
one, is already able to read Chrysippus by himself. Indeed, sir, you
are making great progress. What kind of progress? But why do you mock
the man? Why do you draw him away from the perception of his own
misfortunes? Will you not show him the effect of virtue that he may
learn where to look for improvement? Seek it there, wretch, where your
work lies. And where is your work? In desire and in aversion, that you
may not be disappointed in your desire, and that you may not fall into
that which you would avoid; in your pursuit and avoiding, that you
commit no error; in assent and suspension of assent, that you be not
deceived. The first things, and the most necessary are those which I
have named. But if with trembling and lamentation you seek not to fall
into that which you avoid, tell me how you are improving.
